Section 2: Varied Climate Emotions
Audio Overview — Transcript

In this module, we begin a deeper exploration of climate emotions. You have already learned about theories of emotion, emotional categories, and how emotions can differ from formal mental health conditions. Now we will focus specifically on how emotions are experienced in relation to climate change and environmental challenges.

Climate emotions are a range of natural feelings and emotional responses to the challenges and realities of climate change. They are sometimes also referred to as eco-emotions. Climate emotions reflect a wide spectrum of reactions, from concern, anger, and despair to resilience, empowerment, and hope.

There are many climate emotions which can be grouped in different ways. The upcoming modules will expand on the following clusters of climate emotions: worry and anxiety, stress and trauma responses, grief and solastalgia, guilt and shame, anger and rage, loneliness and alienation, ecoparalysis and fatalism, denial and disengagement. Another way of understanding and grouping climate emotions is through visualizations such as the Climate Emotions Wheel, which was created by Panu Pikhala and presents a range of commonly identified emotional responses.

In addition, the Climate-Related Ecological Distress and Resilience (CEDAR) framework is introduced and describes how climate-related distress can involve a range of emotional, cognitive, physical, and social responses and how they can affect daily functioning and well-being. It also highlights that distress and resilience can exist at the same time and are not mutually exclusive.

Indigenous perspectives highlight how varied climate emotions can represent emotional diversity, relationality and serve as a reflection of deep care and engagement with the natural world, as exemplified in writings by Jeannette Armstrong.

Together, these frameworks and perspectives support in understanding some of the many different climate emotions and groupings, ways in which climate emotions can be felt and experienced, as well as insights into climate-related distress and resilience.
